Refining Android guidelines (#2505)
Azure/azure-sdk: docs/android/design.md

{% include requirement/MUST id="android-service-client-name" %} name service client types with the _Client_ suffix (for example, `ConfigurationClient`).

{% include requirement/MUST id="android-service-client-annotation" %} annotate all service clients with the `@ServiceClient` annotation.

{% include requirement/MUST id="android-service-client-namespace" %} place service client types that the consumer is most likely to interact with in the root package of the client library (for example, `com.azure.android.<group>.servicebus`). Specialized service clients should be placed in sub-packages.

{% include requirement/MUST id="android-service-client-immutable" %} ensure that all service client classes are immutable and stateless upon instantiation.

{% include requirement/MUST id="android-network-separate-packages" %} have separate service clients for sync and async APIs.

> {% include requirement/SHOULD id="android-service-client-feature-support" %} support only those features provided by the Azure service that would make sense for a mobile app would access. Mobile apps are inherently consumer applications, and only a subset of Azure services and features are intended for use by consumer applications. While completeness is valuable and gaps in functionality can cause frustration, a smaller binary size and an opinionated stance of only providing consumer-facing functionality will make our libraries easier and more desirable for app developers to use.

Reviewer: A few comments:

1) Typo on "support only those features provided by the Azure service that would make sense for a mobile app would access."

2) I don't know what you mean by "Mobile apps are inherently consumer applications". If you're saying that most Android apps that would use Azure are generally targeted at the general population, and not targeted at business users - I am not sure we have the data to back that up.

Author: For point no. 2 what I mean to say is that mobile apps are, for the most part, directly user facing, as opposed to middleware or backend software. I can rephrase to avoid confusion.

Author: What about this?

```suggestion
{% include requirement/SHOULD id="android-service-client-feature-support" %} support only those features provided by the Azure service that would make sense for a mobile app would access. Mobile apps are inherently end user-facing applications, and only a subset of Azure services and features are intended for use by these type of applications. While completeness is valuable and gaps in functionality can cause frustration, a smaller binary size and an opinionated stance of only providing end user-facing functionality will make our libraries easier and more desirable for app developers to use.
```

    isAsync = true)
public final class <service_name>AsyncClient {
    // Package-private constructors only - all instantiation is done with builders.
    <service_name>AsyncClient(<parameters>) {
        // ...
    }

    // Service methods...

    // A single response API.
    public CompletableFuture<<model>> <service_operation>(<parameters>) {
        // ...
    }

    // A single response API including HTTP response details.
    public CompletableFuture<Response<<model>>> <service_operation>(<parameters>) {
        // ...
    }

    // A paginated async list API (refer to pagination section for more details).
    public CompletableFuture<PagedDataCollection<<model>>> list<service_operation>(<parameters>) {
        // ...
    }

    // A paginated async list API including HTTP response details (refer to pagination section for more details).
    public CompletableFuture<PagedDataResponseCollection<<model>>> list<service_operation>(<parameters>) {
        // ...
    }

    // Other members.
    ...
}
```

{% include requirement/MUST id="android-async-framework" %} use [Android retro future's][RetroFuture] `CompletableFuture` to provide consumers with a high-quality async API.

> {% include requirement/MUST id="android-async-rxjava" %} additionally provide a separate library containing an RxJava-based async client containing all service methods. The RxJava-based API must be contained within a separate library from the main library with the suffix `-rx`, e.g. `azure-someservice-rx`. Clients for this library must adhere to the async client naming conventions outlined above.

Reviewer: This isn't part of the plan for now.

Author: You mean the Rx-based separate clients or even the use of CompletableFuture?

Reviewer: Rx clients

Author: We can end up adding something like this for cases where the service requires capabilities that Rx or callbacks allow for and that are lacking in `CompletableFuture`.

```suggestion
If you think your business scenario would be better suited for an RxJava or callback-based SDK as opposed to one based on `CompletableFuture`, please contact the [Azure SDK Architecture Board][Architecture Board] for guidance.
```

Reviewer: I wouldn't include that - it invites requests to be different. Let people try with CF first.

{% include requirement/MUST id="android-service-client-builder-validity" %} ensure the builder will instantiate a service client into a valid state. Throw an `IllegalStateException` when the user calls the `build*()` methods with a configuration that is incomplete or invalid.

##### Using ClientOptions

{% include requirement/MUSTNOT id="android-client-options" %} accept options used for customization of the client as individual optional parameters in client builders. Accept a single, immutable `Options` object as an optional parameter for all client builders instead. This object must have a constructor that accepts all possible options for the client constructor as optional parameters. For example:

```java
public class ConfigurationClientOptions extends ClientOptions {
    // An options parameter.
    String someParameter;
    
    public ConfigurationClientOptions(@NonNull ApiVersion apiVersion, @NonNull ClientLogger logger, @NonNull String someParameter) {
         super(apiVersion, logger);
         this.someParameter = someParameter;
    }
}
```

> {% include requirement/MUST id="android-client-options-classes-extend" %} make `Options` objects used when initializing a service client extend from Azure Core's `ClientOptions` class.

Reviewer: I don't understand this guidance. Why are we doing this rather than just have client configuration be first-level configuration settings in the Builder? This deviates from Java and I'm not sure what the purpose of it is.

Author: The concept for this class came before we adopted the builder pattern from Java and is more aligned to what we do in iOS. We can fully follow what Java does here but I have a question about it: what purpose does the `ClientOptions` class serve in Java and why were its members (applicationId, headers) not settable on builders directly but on the options bag itself? Also, is there a specific reason Java's `ClientOptions` is not final? Are we expecting to extend from it so service-specific options are passed to builders through children classes?

Reviewer: ClientOptions is a bundle to pass down to the **HTTP client and pipeline**. If it were individually set values, we would need to bundle them up internally, and users would need to set more properties for each builder, rather than create their single ClientOptions instance that they can reuse. It's not final so users can subclass if they want to support custom http clients / pipelines. It is not intended for service specific options.

Author: Ok, so we will be passing optional service-related parameters to a builder via fluent APIs instead of using a single options bag. Having said that, I think we can still make use of [the design we had for `ClientOptions`](https://github.com/Azure/azure-sdk-for-android/blob/azure-core_1.0.0-beta.3/sdk/core/azure-core/src/main/java/com/azure/android/core/http/options/ClientOptions.java) for passing some non-service-related parameters to a builder. What do you think?

Author: Ended up removing this ability for the time being.

{% include requirement/MUST id="android-versioning-select-service-api" %} provide an enum of supported service API versions that can be supplied via the [options class](#option-parameters) when initializing the service client, as shown below:

```java

> public enum ConfigurationApiVersion implements ApiVersion {

Reviewer: Use `ServiceVersion`, not `ApiVersion`, to be consistent with Java

Author: Do we want to deviate from iOS in this case then? Would we want them to follow in naming this `ServiceVersion`?

Reviewer: ios can do what they want. In Java we've gone with serviceVersion so it would be consistent with that, imho.

Author: Also, is there a reason why .NET and Java use `ServiceVersion` but Python uses `ApiVersion`?

Reviewer: No, architect preference basically.

{% include requirement/MUST id="android-response-pagination" %} return an instance of the `PagedDataCollection` or `PagedDataResponseCollection` classes for all paged operations. For more information on what to return for `list` operations, refer to [Pagination](#pagination).

For methods that combine multiple requests into a single call:

{% include requirement/MUSTNOT id="android-response-return-headers" %} return headers and other per-request metadata unless it's obvious as to which specific HTTP request the methods return value corresponds to.

{% include requirement/MUST id="android-response-failure-cases" %} provide enough information in failure cases for an application to take appropriate corrective action, including a message describing what went wrong and details on the corrective actions to take.

{% include requirement/SHOULDNOT id="android-response-reserved-words" %} use reserved words (such as `class`) as a property name within the logical entity. Avoid reserved words in other supported languages.

#### Service Method Parameters

> {% include requirement/MUST id="android-required-and-optional-method-parameters" %} accept all arguments required to or execute a method call as individual parameters to the method. An argument is considered required if the library author deems it to be essential to the developer experience of the client API, regardless of whether the argument is flagged as required in the service's API spec.

Reviewer: typo: "accept all arguments required to or execute a method call"

Reviewer: I'm not sure what you're saying with the second sentence - is it necessary?

Author: We are trying to give some lenience in what can be considered a required argument. Some arguments that might not be literally declared as "required" in the swagger specification might still be present in most common use cases and thus could be considered important to have as individual parameters in some APIs instead of being put in an options bag.

Reviewer: This is the truth regardless though, right? We are building convenience layers that will have extra API and extra parameters. This feels like it doesn't give enough clarity to readers.

Author: Are you saying that by being too specific we might cast doubt on an otherwise common assumption/reasoning? I think that is possible in some cases but I can't see how it is confusing here (which doesn't mean I'm opposed to removing it, I'm just curious as to why it caught your attention).

Reviewer: In your first sentence you say "accept all arguments required". In your second sentence you are redefining "required" to mean "if the library author deems it to be essential to the developer experience of the client API, regardless of whether the argument is flagged as required in the service's API spec". This is incorrect - something is required if the service requires it. It could also be required if the API designer thinks it is required. Your second sentence takes away the requirement that service-dictated requirements are real. By saying more, you've incorrectly redefined something - so this is a good case where saying less improves clarity.

Author: I see what you mean, the idea behind what I wrote is exactly the one you portrayed in just now: that both arguments flagged as "required" in the service spec and those the API designer considers required, should be treated equally for the purpose of being put in API signatures. That said, this does not mean that a designer can "downgrade" an argument that is "required" in the service spec to "optional", which could be an interpretation of the second sentence.

What do you think of something like the following?

```suggestion
{% include requirement/MUST id="android-required-and-optional-method-parameters" %} accept all arguments required to or execute a method call as individual parameters to the method. An argument is considered required if it is flagged as such in the service's API spec or if the library author deems it to be essential to the developer experience of the client API.
```

        super.setTransactionContext(transactionContext);
        return this;
    }
}
```

{% include requirement/MUST id="android-models-fluent-annotation" %} apply the `@Fluent` annotation to the class.

Fluent types must not be immutable.  Don't return a new instance on each setter call.

{% include requirement/MUST id="android-models-javabeans" %} use the JavaBean naming convention of `get*`, `set*`, and `is*`.

{% include requirement/MUST id="android-models-deserialize" %} include static methods if new model instances are required to be created from raw data. The static method names should be `from<dataFormat>`. For example, to create an instance of `BinaryData` from a string, include a static method called `fromString` in `BinaryData` class.

Model types sometimes exist only as an Azure service return type, and developers would never instantiate these. Often, these model types have API that is not user-friendly (in particular, overly complex constructors). It would be best for developers if they were never presented with this API in the first place, and we refer to these as 'undesirable public API'.

> {% include requirement/MUST id="android-models-interface" %} put model classes that are intended as service return types only, and which have undesirable public API into the `.implementation.models` package. In its place, an interface should be put into the public-facing `.models` package, and it should be this type that is returned through the public API to end users.

Reviewer: Presumably the Android guidance is to use 'internal' rather than 'implementation' (even though I prefer implementation).

Reviewer 2: I also prefer `implementation`, it really simplifies the reuse of existing tools such as doc, code quality tools and apiView.

Author: I know we talked about this for a while and found that a few public libraries use `internal`, although I don't think it's necessarily considered a widespread practice and moreso something of a preference up to the developer. I think Anu's point has some weight as well. I'll revisit some public and widely used libraries to see what name they are using.

Reviewer: I would strongly prefer implementation for exactly the reason Anu shares - APIView, checkstyle, etc are all configured already with knowledge of the implementation special case.

> Examples of situations where this is applicable include when there are constructors or setters on a type which receive implementation types, or when a type should be immutable but needs to be mutable internally. The interface should have the model type name, and the implementation (within `.implementation.models`) should be named `<interfaceName>Impl`.

Reviewer: implementation / internal

```java
public static final class OperationStatus extends ExpandableStringEnum<OperationStatus> {
    public static final OperationStatus NOT_STARTED = fromString("NOT_STARTED");
    public static final OperationStatus IN_PROGRESS = fromString("IN_PROGRESS");
    public static final OperationStatus SUCCESSFULLY_COMPLETED = fromString("SUCCESSFULLY_COMPLETED");
    public static final OperationStatus FAILED = fromString("FAILED");
    public static final OperationStatus USER_CANCELLED = fromString("USER_CANCELLED");

    /**
     * Creates or finds a {@link OperationStatus} from its string representation.
     * @param name A name to look for.
     * @return The corresponding {@link OperationStatus}.
     */
    public static OperationStatus fromString(String name) {
        return fromString(name, OperationStatus.class);
    }
}
```

{% include requirement/MUST id="android-enums-no-future-growth" %} use [Android's TypeDef][TypeDef] notation instead of enum only if the values are known to not change like days of a week, months in a year etc.

> {% include requirement/MUST id="android-enums-future-growth" %} use `ExpandableStringEnum` provided by Azure Core for enumerations if the values are known to expand in future.

Reviewer: This guidance is confusing because it suggests to use `enum` and `TypeDef` for the same use case? My preference would be to use enum wherever applicable, which, as it turns out, is almost nowhere and `ExpandableStringEnum` is by far the default pattern to be used in most cases.

Author: This was first added based on some old documentation saying `enum` was not recommended for Android for performance reasons. Having said that, it looks like this [has not been the case for a while](https://stackoverflow.com/a/4822906/4967034). We can just use `enum` it seems.

Reviewer: Just be clear that enum is much less preferred than ExpandableStringEnum though.
